.Dd 09/23/22
.Dt imp 8
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME
.Nm imp
.Nd A helper for Windows Subsystem for Linux's native systemd support.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op -h
.Op -V
.Op -v
.Op -a
.Ar user
.Op -i
.Op -s
.Op -l
.Op -u
.Op -c
.Ar command...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides a means of running inside a
.Xr systemd 1
user session, with full support for user
.Xr systemd 1
, session dbus, and Windows interoperability.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "-c ..., --command ..."
.It Fl h, -help
Prints a short help text and exits.
.It Fl V, -version
Prints the installed imp version and exits.
.It Fl v, -verbose
Causes any other command to print the details of the operations it is
performing as it goes along. Useful mostly for debugging.
.It Fl a, -as-user
Permits a user to be specified (by name) to execute as when using the -c/--command
or -s/--shell commands.
.It Fl i, -initialize
Sets up the needful for Windows interoperability support, and starts the
lifetime-running process to preserve the current WSL instance. It should
be run before any of the other
.Nm
commands.
.It Fl s, -shell
Runs your login shell within a systemd login session. It is intended as
the standard way to start a shell within a distribution with
.Nm
installed.
.Pp
This follows login semantics, and as such does not preserve the current
working directory.
.It Fl l, -login
Opens a login prompt. This permits you to log in to the WSL distribution
as any user. The login prompt will return when you log out; to terminate
the session, press ^] three times within one second.
.Pp
This follows login semantics, and as such does not preserve the current
working directory.
.It Fl c, -command
Runs the specified command inside a systemd login session. It is
intended as the standard way to run arbitrary commands within a
distribution with
.Nm
installed.
.Pp
Unlike the other options, this preserves the current working directory.
.It Fl u, -shutdown
Shuts down
.Xr systemd 1
cleanly and exits the WSL instance. This uses the
.Ar systemctl poweroff
command to simulate a normal Linux system shutting down. It is suggested that
this be used before shutting down the Windows machine or force-terminating WSL
to ensure a clean shutdown of
.Xr systemd 1
services.
.Pp
Shutting down the WSL instance in this way causes it to exit
.Ar completely.
You should wait for the instance to show as stopped before attempting to restart it
or execute further commands inside it.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
maintains a policy of returning zero on success, and non-zero when an error
occurs.
.Sh NOTES
.Nm
can only be used within a WSL 2 distribution, since
.Xr systemd 1
can only be run within a WSL 2 distribution. WSL 1 does not implement the
system calls required to support it.
.Pp
.Nm
serves no purpose on Linux running outside of the WSL environment, or
within other containers. Its behavior if run in such environments is
undefined.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systemctl 1 ,
.Xr systemd 1 ,
.Xr bootup 7 ,
.Xr systemd-machined 8 ,
.Sh BUGS
1. Using
.Nm
to create a session is required for the user login session (and its concomitants, such as a user 
.Xr systemd 1
instance and a session dbus) to be created properly. Simply starting a process with
.Ar wsl
(or using a Linux GUI app shortcut) does not do this, although the problem is less serious than with
.Ar genie
, since the process will still be started with
.Xr systemd 1
as pid 1.
.Pp
2. While the Windows Terminal environment variables, WT_SESSION and WT_PROFILE_ID, will be passed
through to shell and command prompt invocations of
.Nm
, they will not be passed through to login sessions created with
.Ar imp -l
, due to a limitation in
.Xr machinectl 1
.
.Pp
3.
.Nm
requires the Python package 
.Ar psutil
, which due to technical limitations of 
.Ar zipapp
can't be wrapped into the 
.Nm
executable. As such,
.Nm
depends on this package for the system Python. If you are inside another Python environment,
.Nm
may fail unless you install the 
.Ar psutil
package into this environment also.
.Pp
If you feel you have found a bug in
.Nm
please submit a bug report at
.Ar http://github.com/arkane-systems/bottle-imp/issues
